CONNECTOME-HIPPOCAMPUS DEMONSTRATION  (v1)

This is the sixth and last document. It is the owner's addition to the five-phase
Specification, Pseudocode, Architecture, Refinement, Completion (SPARC) set: a plan
of intentions for demonstrating the repository. It is a plan of intent, not a
finished demonstration. It describes what to run, in what order, what each step
shows, and what a viewer should conclude.

Acronyms spelled out on first use in this file: the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus
for Artificial General Intelligence (ARC-AGI), JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), and
English-Readable Code (ERC). Ed25519 and SWI-Prolog are proper names, verbatim.


PART ONE - THE ONE THING THE DEMONSTRATION SHOULD PROVE

A viewer should leave convinced of a single headline claim: this memory region can
recall what it stored, from full, partial, noisy, and ambiguous cues, and it is
STRUCTURALLY INCAPABLE of returning a memory it never stored - and that incapacity is
DECLARED through PrologAI's membership contract, not hand-written by the region. Every
step below serves that claim.


PART TWO - SETUP (WHAT A VIEWER NEEDS FIRST)

• A checkout of PrologAI at or after commit 2043a09 (the Wave 5 membership contract
  tip), and the PROLOGAI_HOME environment variable pointing at it. Set it once:
  export PROLOGAI_HOME=/path/to/PrologAI

• SWI-Prolog installed and on the path.

• No other setup. The region imports PrologAI read-only; if PrologAI or the membership
  contract construct is missing, every gate stops with a clear message rather than
  proceeding silently.


PART THREE - THE MAIN RUN (THE STORY IN ONE COMMAND)

Run: bin/run_hippocampus.sh

What it does, in order:

• Encodes a fixed set of memories - a red small circle, a blue large square, a red
  large triangle, and a green small circle - chosen so that several share single
  features (red, large, small, circle) but differ in their conjunctions. For each, it
  narrates the dentate separation into a sparse code, the synaptic write, and the
  molecular consolidation toward durable.

• Spawns the CA3 completion actor, which blocks on its own settle cue with no busy
  wait.

• Recalls from five cues and narrates each: a FULL cue (recalls the memory exactly); a
  PARTIAL cue of two of three features (completion reconstructs the third); a
  DISAMBIGUATING cue where two single features each match a different memory but their
  conjunction picks one; a NOISY cue (a whole memory plus a junk feature, tolerated);
  and an UNSTORED cue (features nobody stored), which yields an explicit no_recall.

• Narrates each recurrent completion pass as "recruited a feature, re-entering via the
  Lattice," so the reentrant loop is visible, not hidden in a stack.

• Runs the adversarial episode: it forces a never-stored phantom past completion and
  shows the membership contract REFUSING it.

• Prints the verdict block and exits zero only if every recall was a member or an
  explicit no_recall AND the phantom was refused.

What it shows: the four operations working end to end, the reentrant loop settling
through the Lattice, and the safety property holding on the unstored cue and the
adversarial phantom.


PART FOUR - THE SAFETY DEMONSTRATION (THE FLAGSHIP)

Run: bin/check_membership.sh

What it does: it runs the dedicated adversarial battery that tries, exhaustively over
every non-empty subset of a small stored universe, to make the region recall a memory
nobody stored - both by proposing settled phantoms directly and by driving real
pattern completion from phantom cues and then recalling the result. Each attempt is
classified member, no_recall, refused, or escaped.

What it shows: across the attempts it inspects, there are zero escapes, and phantoms
are safely refused by the contract. This is the flagship evidence for the headline
claim, and it is the gate that a build may never skip.

A viewer should conclude: the guarantee is not a lucky property of the demo inputs; it
holds across a systematic adversarial sweep, and the refusal is the contract's.


PART FIVE - THE REMAINING GATES (THE FULL BILL OF HEALTH)

Run these in any order to show the region is not only safe but well-formed:

• bin/run_tests.sh - every pack's in-pack PLUnit suite passes, including the region's
  no-confabulation tests.

• bin/validate_structure.sh - the twenty-two Causalontology 2.0.0 records validate
  against schema and semantics; the cross-stratal consolidation relation classifies as
  a clean skip; the Ed25519-signed provenance verifies. It also writes the JSON
  artifacts under structure, which a viewer can open and read.

• bin/check_layers.sh - zero upward edges among the packs (the strict layer rule).

• bin/check_layer_binding.sh - every pack's layer is order-preserving with its
  stratum's ordinal (the layer-to-stratum binding).

• bin/check_no_coupling.sh - the reentrant loop reenters through the Lattice, with zero
  actor-to-actor references, no in-process recursion, and no busy wait.

• The mini regression through PrologAI's own harness - the honest ten-percent
  spot-check, ARC-AGI-1 at forty of forty and ARC-AGI-2 at twelve of twelve. State it
  as a spot-check; it is not the full benchmark and must not be presented as
  four-hundred-of-four-hundred.

What they show together: the region is grounded, correctly layered and bound, closed
through the Lattice, and did not disturb the PrologAI it reused.


PART SIX - A SUGGESTED VIEWING ORDER FOR A LIVE AUDIENCE

1. Open README.md and read the four operations and the safety claim aloud.

2. Run bin/run_hippocampus.sh and narrate the trace as it prints - point at the
   reentrant passes and at the explicit no_recall on the unstored cue, then at the
   phantom being refused.

3. Run bin/check_membership.sh and show the zero-escape verdict - this is the moment
   the headline claim is earned.

4. Run the remaining gates quickly, as the bill of health.

5. Open one structure JSON artifact and one Prolog source file to show the grounding
   and the ERC comments (every line has a plain-English explanation).

6. Open LEDGER.md and read the three open findings - close by explaining that in this
   program the findings are the deliverable, and a thin Ledger means the enforced
   invariants carried the region.


PART SEVEN - WHAT CAPABILITIES THE DEMONSTRATION EXHIBITS

• Content-addressable memory: recall of a whole pattern from a fragment, the CA3
  auto-associative capability.

• Decorrelation: pattern separation that keeps near-duplicate memories from colliding.

• Provable termination and closure: a reentrant loop that settles or explicitly
  declines, never hangs, and reenters only through the shared substrate.

• Declared safety: a safety property obtained by naming a contract rather than by
  writing and trusting a guard.

• Glass-box operation: every step narrated, every structure record validated and
  signed, every claim gated.

• Honest engineering: a ten-percent spot-check reported as such, and open limits
  recorded rather than hidden.


PART EIGHT - WHAT A VIEWER SHOULD CONCLUDE

That a small, honest episodic-memory region can be built on two enforced PrologAI
invariants - the layer-to-stratum binding and the membership contract - such that its
defining safety property, no confabulation, is a single declaration that provably
holds; that the reentrant biology of pattern completion maps cleanly onto a
Lattice-coordinated settling loop; and that the exercise's real yield is the recorded
finding that a growing, time-evolving memory store is precisely where PrologAI's
current constructs run out - a plain-list contract facing a growing set, and a store
that has no way to schedule consolidation over time.


PART NINE - REFLECTION ON THE DEMONSTRATION PLAN

The plan leads with running code and ends with the Ledger on purpose. Leading with the
run makes the safety claim concrete before it is explained, and ending with the Ledger
frames the honest limits as the intended result rather than as an apology. The
trade-off accepted is that the demonstration proves a narrow thing deeply - one region,
one safety property, three findings - rather than a broad thing shallowly. For a
program whose method is to build one region at a time and record what it forces
PrologAI to lack, depth on the one claim is the right choice.
